Name of the Case is : Lansdowne_Group_Ltd_&_Nor_v_Weightman's_LLP_[2024].txt



Determining Judge: RAMALINGAM

 Issue to be Considered : 
 issue d some 44 invoices during the retainer period, against which payments of approximately £2.24m have been made by the Claimants 

Questions For The Court : 
1. Whether they are interim statute bills under the Solicitors Act 1974 or requests for payments on account
2. Whether the delivered invoices form aChamberlainBill such that assessment may be ordered, subject to conditions where applicable. The Claimants' Submissions Ms Ailing KC represents the Claimants and confirmed that the single issue before the court, as of today, is the status of the Defendant's invoices
3. Whether a document is a separate bill of costs or, so to speak a chapter in a volume
4. Whether a document has been delivered as a bill of costs, it must not be forgotten that the onus of showing that it has been lies on the solicitor." Ms Ailing KC then referred to the witness statement of Mr Kelly dated 3 July 2023, which sets out payments on account made in the total sum of £2,240,679.18 (as against requests for payment, at that stage, of £2,964,894.14). This statement expresses that Mr Kelly never understood the invoices he had received to be interim statute bills, but rather that they were a series of requests for payments on account
5. Whether the bills raised are interim statute bills is a matter of fact, and Ms Ailing KC submits that the test is not what the Defendant intended to do but what they in fact did. Ms Ailing KC referred to the Defendant's skeleton argument at paragraph 23 where it states:"The second, more substantive point, is that occasionally a bill will include time spent in a period covered by an earlier bill
6. Whether a bill is an interim statute bill, citing the relevant legal principles as to the status of a bill as set out in paragraphs 13 to 17 of Bari v Rosen[2012] 5 Costs LR 851
7. Whether a given invoice is final for the charges it represents, but whether it incorporates a final charge for the work it represents
8. Whether an invoice is a statute bill or not. Turning to the Claimants' case summary, Ms Ailing KC invited focus on paragraphs 21 to 33 (bundle pages 30 to 31) which demonstrates where overlap time entries have arisen, as summarized at paragraph 26 of the Claimants' skeleton argument which highlights 13 examples. Ms Ailing KC submits those 13 examples represent a non-exhaustive list which rebuts any argument that the incidents of overlap in this matter were either isolated or minimal. Invoice number 01881496 dated 28 June 2019 in the total sum of £8,232 was followed by a further invoice dated 10 July 2019, bearing the same invoice number but in the sum of £16,706.40
9. Whether a right to raise interim statute bills exists under the terms of the retainer, and that the Claimants cannot offer a rival meaning for that phrase
10. Whether a contract empowers a solicitor to render interim statutory bills falls, in my view, to be determined upon the normal principles of contractual interpretation
11. Whether a bill is a statute bill or not
12. Whether in the case of a series of bills each bill has been sent in as a final bill, or whether they are mere statements of account showing how far the expenses have gone up to the time of sending them in, is a question of fact to be determined on the evidence in each case, and it is a question which cannot be determined in any case upon the finding of the Court in any other case
13. Whether the facts may or may not look exactly alike. It becomes, therefore, a question of fact in the present case whether the solicitors ever sent in a final bill before the last one." Mr Benson submits that "in the full weigh up", the Defendant has issued interim statute bills. In the event I am against the Defendant in regard to the delivery of interim statute bills, Mr Benson submits that the invoice dated 16 November 2022 is "clearly a final bill", forming aChamberlainseries. With regard to the implications of judgment that aChamberlainbill has been created, Mr Benson observes that on 30 March 2023 the Defendant obtained judgment on 3 of the issued bills, including the 16 November 2022 bill
14. Whether special circumstances arise such that assessment should be ordered. The Claimants' responses Ailing KC observed that aChamberlainbill does not result from some bills being statute bills and some being requests for payments on account. Romerdoesn't support such an approach and indeed no decided authority says as such. The question is what was the overall agreement? There was certainly no overall arrangement to mix interim statute bills and requests for payments on account, and in any event no such argument appears in the Defendant's skeleton argument. Relying on paragraph 56 foodie, Ms Ailing invites consideration of the overall arrangement a client and solicitor enters into, and the potential to jeopardize that arrangement, under the section of the judgment dealing with "(a) The effect of the express term", which has already been outlined above. As to the burden of proof, Ms Ailing relies on her skeleton argument
15. Whether any individual bill issued to the client was a statute bill
16. Whether by omission or due to ambiguity, the outcome is the same. In that regard, I concur with Mr Benson that there will either be an express agreement or not
17. Whether or not a contractual right exists to raise interim statute bills, clearly the whole contract will be considered
18. Whether an obligation does arise, I observe that in Adams v Al Malik, Mr Justice Fulford (as he then was) expressed the view that not only does a solicitor have an obligation to advise a client of their rights under the act, but also to explain what the legal consequences of the service of an interim statute bill would be, a view echoed by Costs Judge Rowley unmasters v Charles Russell. In any event, paragraphs 28 and 29 Winslade v Erlamdemonstrate the clear distinction between what is expected, and what is the reality in the index case
19. Whether the invoices delivered were interim statute bills. Whilst the Defendant contends that, as per paragraph 8 ofIvanishvili, the burden is on the Claimants to show that the disputed bills are not interim statute bills, the practical reality is that it is question of fact – and one which both parties have an interest in proving or disproving
20. Whether an interim statute bill has been delivered
21. Whether an express agreement exists
22. Whether an implied agreement arises in the absence of an express contractual right, I do not consider that an agreement can be inferred from the Claimants' conduct or via acquiescence


Appellant Argues in the Court:

Acquiescence is a condition of an express agreement, says Aaron Carroll. The bill is to be challenged at the time, the challenge will be a LY years later. Acquiescence will not be a condition for an interim statute bill, according to a judge who found that acquiescence was not a condition in the case of a bill that was to be presented to the House Judiciary Committee for consideration. A witness statement dated 22 November 2023 was only filed a day before hearing.a hearing will be held on Thursday to determine the status of the bills.a spokesman for the Defendant said they were not liable for any loss or damage caused by the loss of the judgment.a judgment was handed down remotely at 4pm on 30/11/2023.a statement was issued by the Defendant in response to a lawsuit filed by the Plaintiff.

1. The Claimants' Submissions Ms Ailing KC represents the Claimants and confirmed that the single issue before the court, as of today, is the status of the Defendant's invoices. 

2. Ms Ailing KC concluded by conceding that if the court finds that a right to raise interim statute bills arises, and that any of the delivered bills are interim statute bills as a matter of fact and paid over 12 months before the Claimants made their claim, then the Claimants are statute barred from seeking assessment in respect of those invoices. 

3. However, once the Defendants had elected to spell out the Claimants' options both in the terms and conditions, and at the foot of each invoice, the Defendants adopted at least some responsibility to ensure the information provided would not lead the Claimants into unwittingly giving up the Solicitors Act rights. 


Defendant Argues in the Court:

McCarthy: 'there is no express consent to interim statute bills' he says if bill is to be challenged at time, challenge will occur at a time when memories are more fresh. A total of 67 cases have been heard in the high court in the last year. The court will decide whether they are interim statute bills or requests for payments on account. A single issue before the court is the status of the Defendant's invoices. The court will also decide whether there is a conflict of interest between the defendant's attorneys and the court in which the case is being heard, as well as whether the court has jurisdiction over the case.


1. This is likely why the Defendant has in any event sought to discharge that burden in their submissions, rather than absolve themselves from all responsibility in aiding the court's exercise of the necessary analysis required. 

2. Ms Ailing KC observed that were the court to adopt this position, the Defendant accepts a delivery date of 17 November 2022 in terms of the date from which the time limits under the Solicitors Act 1974 would run, if the bills are not statute bills. 

3. Citing the guidance India, Ms Ailing KC submits that the invoices are insufficient in terms of the adequacy of the notice given to the Claimants as to theirs and the Defendant's stated rights upon issue of the invoice. 


Case Law Reference:

Unmasters v Charles
CitingIvanishvili v Signature
Bari v Rosen
Slade v Bosnia
Ltd v Another
Nor v Weightman's

Laws Referred : 
 
 1. The last 6 invoices were not paid, leading to the issuance of Part 7 proceedings by the Defendant in which a default judgment was obtained in the sum of £618,125.86, plus interest and costs, on 30 March 2023. The Claimants issued Part 8 proceedings, seeking a stay of the Defendant's Part 7 proceedings, delivery up of the Defendant's full file of electronic papers, and a decision as to which of the Defendant's invoices ought to be the subject of an assessment under the Act. 
 2. Bills which are statute barred under s70(4) of the Act, and those requiring that special circumstances be shown under the various subsections of s70(3). On 3 May 2023, following a directions hearing, the Claimants were given permission to amend their claim to include delivery of a bill of costs compliant with section 69 of the Solicitors Act 1974, upon the Claimants' contention that the bills delivered are not statute bills and therefore not capable of assessment under section 70 of the act. 
 3. The issue before the court as at the time of this hearing concerns the status of the Defendant's various invoices, namely whether they are interim statute bills under the Solicitors Act 1974 or requests for payments on account. 
 4. Ailing KC submits that unmasters, there was a contractual entitlement to have monthly bills and there was provision about the ability to seek assessments under the Solicitors Act 1974. 
 5. The Solicitors Act 1974 (and prior statutes from which section 70 is derived) do not provide any such express obligation, whilst being prescriptive as to what is to be part of a bill. 
 6. The reasoning that there is no requirement to have informed consent in the Solicitors Act or in the Solicitors Conduct Rules as a pre-condition of an interim bill is telling. 
 7. Whilst noting the points made about fighting the solicitor and the adversary at the same time, there are other points which reduce the impact of this, namely:(i) if the interim bill is final, the solicitor does not have the opportunity to seek a higher remuneration at a later stage as a result of the bill being final and not just a request for money on account;(ii) if the bill is to be challenged at the time, then the challenge will occur at a point in time when memories are much more fresh than if the dispute has to be dealt with potentially years later;(iii) in considering fiduciary duties of solicitors, leaving aside professional and duties under the Code of Conduct which are different, Sir Geoffrey Vs MR stated that solicitors act for themselves in negotiating a new fee arrangement with a client and have the freedom to negotiate a new retainer in their own interests. 
 8. She also observed that if Mr Kelly had followed the Defendant's complaints procedure, the time taken would have unwittingly caused him to give up the right to a statutory assessment because of time limits under the Solicitors Act. 
 9. Ms Ailing KC drew particular attention to the final paragraph of section 6 of the terms and conditions, which provides:"However we charge, we will provide you with details of the time spent and fees incurred to date on a regular basis or on request. 
 10. Ms Ailing KC then referred me to section 11 of the terms and conditions (bundle page 1,019) which provides:"Unless otherwise agreed (perhaps in the CCL), we will submit a statutory interim bill for our charges and expenses at the end of every 28 days while the matter is in progress. 
 11. With regard to any questions about a bill, Ms Ailing KC observed that the 4thbullet point under section 11 of the terms and conditions states:"If you have any queries about your bill, you should contact the supervising partner or manager straight away. 
 12. If you wish to dispute the amount we have charged, you should be aware of the following rights of challenge"Ms Ailing KC submits that there is no clear explanation of the Solicitors Act 1974 or the Claimants' rights under the same. 
 13. The Defendant's complaints procedure (referenced in section 11 of the terms and conditions) appears at section 19 (bundle page 1,022) of the same document and states "If when we tell you that we have finished investigating your complaint (usually within eight weeks) 
 14. Ms Ailing KC observed that eight weeks would take a client outside the 1-month limit under which they have an absolute right to assessment under the Solicitors Act 1974, and yet there is no mention of the act within section 19 of the terms and conditions. 
 15. Section 19 also states that contact with the Legal Ombudsman should be made within 6 months of the last contact with the Defendant. 
 16. Thereafter, a list of options are set out being the Defendant's complaints procedure, the making of a complaint to the Legal Ombudsman, or finally by applying for assessment under "Part 111 of the Solicitors Act 1974", which Ms Ailing KC accepts is clearly an unintentional mistype but nevertheless one a lay client will unlikely realize is an error. 
 17. Ms Ailing KC observed that were the court to adopt this position, the Defendant accepts a delivery date of 17 November 2022 in terms of the date from which the time limits under the Solicitors Act 1974 would run, if the bills are not statute bills. 
 18. Put another way, Ms Ailing KC submits that there is nothing in terms of conduct that turns this into aChamberlainbill such that time has begun to run for the purpose of the Solicitors Act 1974, and there are in any event are too many flaws in the invoices to treat them as a run of bills, when one looks at the content of the bills and the absence of a contractual right to raise them. 
 19. As to the burden of proof, Mr Benson relies on section 69 of the Solicitors Act 1974, subsection (2E) and Costs Judge Leonard's analysis of the same at paragraphs 6 to 8 ofIvanishvili. 
 20. The Defendant accepts that they did not give the Claimants a full explanation of their assessment rights under section 70 of the Solicitors Act. 
 21. "Returning to the Terms and Conditions, Mr Benson invited me to consider the second paragraph of clause 11 (bundle page 1,019), which states:"We reserve the right to ask you to pay us money on account of both profit costs and disbursements before we incur them". 
 22. Benson accepts that, on occasion, judges have lamented the operation of the Solicitors Act 1974 in terms of client protection. 
 23. Whilst there may be such a need here it has not resulted in any changes to the Act or relevant regulatory reform. 
 24. For the same reasons, he says there is no requirement to refer to specific provisions of the Solicitors Act 1974 in detail. 
 25. He therefore resists any criticism of his client for the provision of such information alongside references to the Solicitors Act 1974. Mr 
 26. She does not accept that Section 69, 2E to be the complete answer the Defendant says it is in terms of where the burden lies. 
 27. Where a solicitor issues to his client a bill of costs which complies with the requirements of the Solicitors Act 1974 it is known colloquially as a "statute bill". 
 28. However, if a statute bill has not been paid and the client applies to the High Court for assessment of the bill within twelve months from delivery of the bill, the combined effect of section 70 (2) and (3) is that the High Court may allow assessment (and I am advised by my assessors usually does allow assessment), on such terms as the court thinks fit. 
 29. The final paragraph of section 6 of the terms and conditions states:"However we charge, we will provide you with details of the time spent and fees incurred to date on a regular basis or on request. 
 30. Section 11 of the terms and conditions states:"Unless otherwise agreed (perhaps in the CCL), we will submit a statutory interim bill for our charges and expenses at the end of every 28 says while the matter is in progress. 
 31. Section 11 of the terms and conditions carries the title "Billing arrangements and payments on account", with no distinction drawn between the two, for example by addressing them in separate sections of the terms. 
 32. In my view, section 11 fails to adequately distinguish between what is a 'payment on account' and what is a 'billing arrangement', nor does it adequately explain what the 'billing arrangement' is and means for the client? 
 33. With regard to any client questions about a bill, the 4thbullet point under section 11 of the terms and conditions states:"If you have any queries about your bill, you should contact the supervising partner or manager straight away. 
 34. The Defendant's complaints procedure (set out at section 19 of the terms) states "If when we tell you that we have finished investigating your complaint (usually within eight weeks) 
 35. Eight weeks would take the Claimants outside the 1-month statutory limit under which they have an absolute right to assessment under the Solicitors Act 1974. 
 36. When looked at in full, the section 19 information demonstrates how rather than the terms and conditions being explicit as to the Claimants' rights, they arguably give the impression that any dispute as to a bill ought to be first explored though a complaints process lasting up to eight weeks, and then via the Legal Ombudsman up to 6 months after that expiry of that eight weeks. 
 37. So, whilst I accept that the Defendant was not obligated to advise the Claimants as to their rights, the information provided in the terms and conditions, which was ultimately consistent with the "Notice to Client" (about rights) contained at the foot of each invoice, either ultimately leads a client into taking a path that unwittingly gives up some or all of their rights under the time limits contained in the Solicitors Act 1974, or is otherwise consistent with an agreement that interim statute bills were not being raised, and a final bill would be delivered at the end of the matter. 
 38. On the one hand, the Defendant places great faith in the notion that there is no burden or statutory requirement to advise a client with respect to the specific provisions of the Solicitors Act, which in effect confers certain protections on both solicitors and clients. 
 39. Thereafter, the client is advised to chronologically contact the managing or supervising partner, then utilize a complaints' procedure which has a self-imposed 8-week deadline for a response, then deferral to the Legal Ombudsman, and finally referral to the Solicitors Act 1974. Any client who followed that advice was bound to find themselves falling foul of at least the absolute right to an assessment conferred by section 70(1) of the act, and thereafter left to the mercy of the court's discretion or potentially the higher bar of having to demonstrate special circumstances. 
 40. As such, whilst I concur with previous judicial comment that there is no statutory requirement to advise a client as to their specific section 70 rights under the Solicitors Act, it strikes me there is a potential special circumstances argument where the following of advice voluntarily given by a solicitor places a client outside the time limits which would otherwise permit them to an absolute right to assessment. 
 41. In any event, I do not consider that the Claimants are arguing that the Defendant was obligated to spell out their rights under section 70 of the Solicitors Act 1974, nor explain how to seek an assessment of costs under the act. 
 42. However, once the Defendants had elected to spell out the Claimants' options both in the terms and conditions, and at the foot of each invoice, the Defendants adopted at least some responsibility to ensure the information provided would not lead the Claimants into unwittingly giving up the Solicitors Act rights. 
 43. I cannot see, nor do I recall being taken to, a single invoice which on its face states it is an "interim statute bill", or indeed a "statutory interim bill (to adopt the language of section 11 of the terms and conditions). Taken in conjunction with the guidance (at the foot of each invoice) that any challenge to an invoice should, in order, firstly follow the Defendant's complaints procedure, then refer to the Legal Ombudsman, and finally seek an assessment under a misquoted section of the Solicitors Act, the guidance the Defendant elected to provide undermines client protections under the act – if each issued invoice is a bona fide interim statute bill. 
 44. Additionally, those with professional legal costs law expertise will plainly know there is no Part 111 of the Solicitors Act 1974, and that the intention was presumably to refer to Part III. 
 45. Even if such "neutral weight" were to attach, it does not escape the fact that read in its natural order those words would, in my view, lead any reasonable lay client to follow the sequence suggested by their acting solicitors and thereby unwittingly give up some or all of the rights they would otherwise have under the Solicitors Act 1974. Further, the argument that the absence of requests for payments on account indicates an intention to issue interim statute bills, is an invitation to infer what the invoices were intended to be. 
 46. Further, it strikes me would not be onerous for each invoice to bear the words, "This is an interim statute bill", if that was the intention, followed by an extract of the relevant provisions showing the time limits under the Solicitors Act 1974. 
Issues considered by the Judge : 
retentions

Outcome : 
The application was unsuccessful

Costs : 
 
 1. The Defendant raised and issued some 44 invoices during the retainer period, against which payments of approximately £2.24m have been made by the Claimants. 
 2. The last 6 invoices were not paid, leading to the issuance of Part 7 proceedings by the Defendant in which a default judgment was obtained in the sum of £618,125.86, plus interest and costs, on 30 March 2023. The Claimants issued Part 8 proceedings, seeking a stay of the Defendant's Part 7 proceedings, delivery up of the Defendant's full file of electronic papers, and a decision as to which of the Defendant's invoices ought to be the subject of an assessment under the Act. 
 3. The claim was also amended to correct a date error in respect of invoice 1931283, and to add 3 further invoices taking the amended total to £2,964,894.13. 
 4. Reliance is placed incomer v Haslam[1893] 2 QB 296 and the judgment of Bowen J (at 298-299), where the court found that "[the solicitor] must make out as to each document of the series that there has been such a delivery of a bill of costs as to satisfy the law". 
 5. Ailing KC then referred to the witness statement of Mr Kelly dated 3 July 2023, which sets out payments on account made in the total sum of £2,240,679.18 (as against requests for payment, at that stage, of £2,964,894.14). This statement expresses that Mr Kelly never understood the invoices he had received to be interim statute bills, but rather that they were a series of requests for payments on account. 
 6. The total amount so recorded is £10,860 + VAT about 0.4% of the total billed. 
 7. All that said, the Firm is equally disinclined to argue about trifling amounts and so readily abandons the costs recorded in overlapping periods (the £10,860 + VAT)." Ms 
 8. Invoice number 01881496 dated 28 June 2019 in the total sum of £8,232 was followed by a further invoice dated 10 July 2019, bearing the same invoice number but in the sum of £16,706.40. 
 9. Ms Ailing KC roundly rejects the Defendant's de minimis argument as an attempt to backdate amendments to issued invoices via a skeleton argument, when it was unclear what was being amended, and additionally advised that those instructing her had not yet had time to work out how the precise figure of £10,860 referenced in the Defendant's skeleton argument was arrived at. 
 10. If, for example, the bill is for £5,000, but the solicitors wish to say that they will accept £4,000 in full and final settlement if payment is made within 14 days, that should be clearly stated. 
 11. To take an example, there was a bill dated 3 January 1997 in the sum of £3000 for the "provision of legal services" between 6 December 1996 and 3 January 1997, those services then being detailed. 
 12. That is the reason why, at paragraphs 21 to 24 of the Defendant's skeleton argument, the Defendant "gives up" the "costs recorded in the overlapping periods" of £10,860 plus VAT. 
 13. The figure of £10,860 plus VAT has been calculated by the Defendant as a genuine effort to identify and concede any such time. 
 14. Indeed, he argued that even if the overlap were half a million pounds as opposed to circa £10,000, he would still maintain that the earlier bill was a statute bill and a hard cap, and in doing so a client would avoid being billed an extra £½ m by operation of the contract. 
 15. Under the "Private costs" section of the client care letter, at page 3 of the same, it sets out a modest initial budget of £10,000 + VAT "to cover information gathering and some preliminary analysis". 
 16. The Defendant, at paragraph 23 of their skeleton argument, describes the sum of £10,860 + VAT as a "trifling amount". 
 17. This is in the context of bills running to well in excess of £2m in total. 
 18. However, on any measure, £10,860 + VAT is not a 'trifling' amount of money. 
 19. In the index matter, and on the Defendant's own evidence, adjustment of nearly £11,000 to issued invoices are sought. 


Link : http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Costs/2024/1600.html
